    The dandelions and buttercups
    Gild all the lawn; the drowsy bee
    Stumbles among the clover-tops,
    And summer sweetens all but me:
    Away, unfruitful lore of books,                                      5
    For whose vain idiom we reject
    The soul's more native dialect,
    Aliens among the birds and brooks,
    Dull to interpret or conceive
    What gospels lost the woods retrieve!                               10
    Away, ye critics, city-bred,
    Who springes set of thus and so,
    And in the first man's footsteps tread,
    Like those who toil through drifted snow!
    Away, my poets, whose sweet spell[32]                               15
    Can make a garden of a cell!
    I need ye not, for I to-day
    Will make one long sweet verse of play.

[Footnote 32: There is a delightful pair of poems by Wordsworth,
_Expostulation and Reply_, and _The Tables Turned_, which show how
another poet treats books and nature.]

      Snap, chord of manhood's tenser strain!
    To-day I will be a boy again;                                       20
    The mind's pursuing element,
    Like a bow slackened and unbent,
    In some dark corner shall be leant.
    The robin sings, as of old, from the limb!
    The catbird croons in the lilac bush!                               25
    Through the dim arbor, himself more dim,
    Silently hops the hermit-thrush,
    The withered leaves keep dumb for him;
    The irreverent buccaneering bee
    Hath stormed and rifled the nunnery                                 30
    Of the lily, and scattered the sacred floor
    With haste-dropt gold from shrine to door;
    There, as of yore,
    The rich, milk-tingeing buttercup
    Its tiny polished urn holds up,                                     35
    Filled with ripe summer to the edge,
    The sun in his own wine to pledge;
    And our tall elm, this hundredth year
    Doge of our leafy Venice here,
    Who, with an annual ring, doth wed                                  40
    The blue Adriatic overhead,
    Shadows with his palatial mass
    The deep canals of flowing grass.

      O unestranged birds and bees!
    O face of Nature always true!                                       45
    O never-unsympathizing trees!
    O never-rejecting roof of blue,
    Whose rash disherison never falls
    On us unthinking prodigals,
    Yet who convictest all our ill,                                     50
    So grand and unappeasable!
    Methinks my heart from each of these
    Plucks part of childhood back again,
    Long there imprisoned, as the breeze
    Doth every hidden odor seize                                        55
    Of wood and water, hill and plain;
    Once more am I admitted peer
    In the upper house of Nature here,
    And feel through all my pulses run
    The royal blood of breeze and sun.                                  60

      Upon these elm-arched solitudes
    No hum of neighbor toil intrudes;
    The only hammer that I hear
    Is wielded by the woodpecker,
    The single noisy calling his                                        65
    In all our leaf-hid Sybaris;
    The good old time, close-hidden here,
    Persists, a loyal cavalier,
    While Roundheads prim, with point of fox,
    Probe wainscot-chink and empty box;                                 70
    Here no hoarse-voiced iconoclast
    Insults thy statues, royal Past;
    Myself too prone the axe to wield,
    I touch the silver side of the shield
    With lance reversed, and challenge peace,                           75
    A willing convert of the trees.

      How chanced it that so long I tost
    A cable's length from this rich coast,
    With foolish anchors hugging close
    The beckoning weeds and lazy ooze,                                  80
    Nor had the wit to wreck before
    On this enchanted island's shore,
    Whither the current of the sea,
    With wiser drift, persuaded me?

      O, might we but of such rare days                                 85
    Build up the spirit's dwelling-place!
    A temple of so Parian stone
    Would brook a marble god alone,
    The statue of a perfect life,
    Far-shrined from earth's bestaining strife.                         90
    Alas! though such felicity
    In our vext world here may not be,
    Yet, as sometimes the peasant's hut
    Shows stones which old religion cut
    With text inspired, or mystic sign                                  95
    Of the Eternal and Divine,
    Torn from the consecration deep
    Of some fallen nunnery's mossy sleep,
    So, from the ruins of this day
    Crumbling in golden dust away,                                     100
    The soul one gracious block may draw,
    Carved with some fragment of the law,
    Which, set in life's prosaic wall,
    Old benedictions may recall,
    And lure some nunlike thoughts to take                             105
    Their dwelling here for memory's sake.
