      One after one the stars have risen and set,
    Sparkling upon the hoarfrost on my chain:
    The Bear, that prowled all night about the fold
    Of the North-Star, hath shrunk into his den,
    Scared by the blithesome footsteps of the Dawn,                      5
    Whose blushing smile floods all the Orient;
    And now bright Lucifer grows less and less,
    Into the heaven's blue quiet deep-withdrawn.
    Sunless and starless all, the desert sky
    Arches above me, empty as this heart                                10
    For ages hath been empty of all joy,
    Except to brood upon its silent hope,
    As o'er its hope of day the sky doth now.
    All night have I heard voices: deeper yet
    The deep low breathing of the silence grew.                         15
    While all about, muffled in awe, there stood
    Shadows, or forms, or both, clear-felt at heart,
    But, when I turned to front them, far along
    Only a shudder through the midnight ran,
    And the dense stillness walled me closer round.                     20
    But still I heard them wander up and down
    That solitude, and flappings of dusk wings
    Did mingle with them, whether of those hags
    Let slip upon me once from Hades deep,
    Or of yet direr torments, if such be,                               25
    I could but guess; and then toward me came
    A shape as of a woman: very pale
    It was, and calm; its cold eyes did not move,
    And mine moved not, but only stared on them.
    Their fixed awe went through my brain like ice;                     30
    A skeleton hand seemed clutching at my heart,
    And a sharp chill, as if a dank night fog
    Suddenly closed me in, was all I felt:
    And then, methought, I heard a freezing sigh,
    A long, deep, shivering sigh, as from blue lips                     35
    Stiffening in death, close to mine ear. I thought
    Some doom was close upon me, and I looked
    And saw the red moon through the heavy mist,
    Just setting, and it seemed as it were falling,
    Or reeling to its fall, so dim and dead                             40
    And palsy-struck it looked. Then all sounds merged
    Into the rising surges of the pines,
    Which, leagues below me, clothing the gaunt loins
    Of ancient Caucasus with hairy strength,
    Sent up a murmur in the morning wind,                               45
    Sad as the wail that from the populous earth
    All day and night to high Olympus soars,
    Fit incense to thy wicked throne, O Jove!

      Thy hated name is tossed once more in scorn
    From off my lips, for I will tell thy doom.                         50
    And are these tears? Nay, do not triumph, Jove!
    They are wrung from me but by the agonies
    Of prophecy, like those sparse drops which fall
    From clouds in travail of the lightning, when
    The great wave of the storm high-curled and black                   55
    Rolls steadily onward to its thunderous break.
    Why art thou made a god of, thou poor type
    Of anger, and revenge, and cunning force?
    True Power was never born of brutish strength,
    Nor sweet Truth suckled at the shaggy dugs                          60
    Of that old she-wolf. Are thy thunder-bolts,
    That quell the darkness for a space, so strong
    As the prevailing patience of meek Light,
    Who, with the invincible tenderness of peace,
    Wins it to be a portion of herself?                                 65
    Why art thou made a god of, thou, who hast
    The never-sleeping terror at thy heart,
    That birthright of all tyrants, worse to bear
    Than this thy ravening bird on which I smile?
    Thou swear'st to free me, if I will unfold                          70
    What kind of doom it is whose omen flits
    Across thy heart, as o'er a troop of doves
    The fearful shadow of the kite. What need
    To know that truth whose knowledge cannot save?
    Evil its errand hath, as well as Good;                              75
    When thine is finished, thou art known no more:
    There is a higher purity than thou,
    And higher purity is greater strength;
    Thy nature is thy doom, at which thy heart
    Trembles behind the thick wall of thy might.                        80
    Let man but hope, and thou art straightway chilled
    With thought of that drear silence and deep night
    Which, like a dream, shall swallow thee and thine:
    Let man but will, and thou art god no more,
    More capable of ruin than the gold                                  85
    And ivory that image thee on earth.
    He who hurled down the monstrous Titan-brood[20]
    Blinded with lightnings, with rough thunders stunned,
    Is weaker than a simple human thought.
    My slender voice can shake thee, as the breeze,                     90
    That seems but apt to stir a maiden's hair,
    Sways huge Oceanus from pole to pole;
    For I am still Prometheus, and foreknow
    In my wise heart the end and doom of all.

      Yes, I am still Prometheus, wiser grown                           95
    By years of solitude,--that holds apart
    The past and future, giving the soul room
    To search into itself,--and long commune
    With this eternal silence;--more a god,
    In my long-suffering and strength to meet                          100
    With equal front the direst shafts of fate,
    Than thou in thy faint-hearted despotism,
    Girt with thy baby-toys of force and wrath.
    Yes, I am that Prometheus who brought down
    The light to man, which thou, in selfish fear,                     105
    Hadst to thyself usurped,--his by sole right,
    For Man hath right to all save Tyranny,--
    And which shall free him yet from thy frail throne.
    Tyrants are but the spawn of Ignorance,
    Begotten by the slaves they trample on,                            110
    Who, could they win a glimmer of the light,
    And see that Tyranny is always weakness,
    Or Fear with its own bosom ill at ease,
    Would laugh away in scorn the sand-wove chain
    Which their own blindness feigned for adamant.                     115
    Wrong ever builds on quicksands, but the Right
    To the firm centre lays its moveless base.
    The tyrant trembles, if the air but stirs
    The innocent ringlets of a child's free hair,
    And crouches, when the thought of some great spirit,               120
    With world-wide murmur, like a rising gale,
    Over men's hearts, as over standing corn,
    Rushes, and bends them to its own strong will.
    So shall some thought of mine yet circle earth,
    And puff away thy crumbling altars, Jove!                         125

[Footnote 20: That is, Jove himself.]

      And, wouldst thou know of my supreme revenge,
    Poor tyrant, even now dethroned in heart,
    Realmless in soul, as tyrants ever are,
    Listen! and tell me if this bitter peak,
    This never-glutted vulture, and these chains                       130
    Shrink not before it; for it shall befit
    A sorrow-taught, unconquered Titan-heart.
    Men, when their death is on them, seem to stand
    On a precipitous crag that overhangs
    The abyss of doom, and in that depth to see,                       135
    As in a glass, the features dim and vast
    Of things to come, the shadows, as it seems,
    Of what had been. Death ever fronts the wise;
    Not fearfully, but with clear promises
    Of larger life, on whose broad vans upborne,                       140
    Their outlook widens, and they see beyond
    The horizon of the present and the past,
    Even to the very source and end of things.
    Such am I now: immortal woe hath made
    My heart a seer, and my soul a judge                               145
    Between the substance and the shadow of Truth.
    The sure supremeness of the Beautiful,
    By all the martyrdoms made doubly sure
    Of such as I am, this is my revenge,
    Which of my wrongs builds a triumphal arch,                        150
    Through which I see a sceptre and a throne.
    The pipings of glad shepherds on the hills,
    Tending the flocks no more to bleed for thee,--
    The songs of maidens pressing with white feet
    The vintage on thine altars poured no more,--                      155
    The murmurous bliss of lovers, underneath
    Dim grapevine bowers, whose rosy bunches press
    Not half so closely their warm cheeks, unpaled
    By thoughts of thy brute lust,--the hive-like hum
    Of peaceful commonwealths, where sunburnt Toil                     160
    Reaps for itself the rich earth made its own
    By its own labor, lightened with glad hymns
    To an omnipotence which thy mad bolts
    Would cope with as a spark with the vast sea,--
    Even the spirit of free love and peace,                            165
    Duty's sure recompense through life and death,--
    These are such harvests as all master-spirits
    Reap, haply not on earth, but reap no less
    Because the sheaves are bound by hands not theirs;
    These are the bloodless daggers wherewithal                        170
    They stab fallen tyrants, this their high revenge:
    For their best part of life on earth is when,
    Long after death, prisoned and pent no more,
    Their thoughts, their wild dreams even, have become
    Part of the necessary air men breathe:                             175
    When, like the moon, herself behind a cloud,
    They shed down light before us on life's sea,
    That cheers us to steer onward still in hope.
    Earth with her twining memories ivies o'er
    Their holy sepulchres; the chainless sea,                          180
    In tempest or wide calm, repeats their thoughts;
    The lightning and the thunder, all free things,
    Have legends of them for the ears of men.
    All other glories are as falling stars,
    But universal Nature watches theirs:                               185
    Such strength is won by love of human-kind.

      Not that I feel that hunger after fame,
    Which souls of a half-greatness are beset with;
    But that the memory of noble deeds
    Cries shame upon the idle and the vile,                            190
    And keeps the heart of Man forever up
    To the heroic level of old time.
    To be forgot at first is little pain
    To a heart conscious of such high intent
    As must be deathless on the lips of men;                           195
    But, having been a name, to sink and be
    A something which the world can do without,
    Which, having been or not, would never change
    The lightest pulse of fate,--this is indeed
    A cup of bitterness the worst to taste,                            200
    And this thy heart shall empty to the dregs.
    Endless despair shall be thy Caucasus,
    And memory thy vulture; thou wilt find
    Oblivion far lonelier than this peak,--
    Behold thy destiny! Thou think'st it much                          205
    That I should brave thee, miserable god!
    But I have braved a mightier than thou.
    Even the tempting of this soaring heart,
    Which might have made me, scarcely less than thou,
    A god among my brethren weak and blind,--                          210
    Scarce less than thou, a pitiable thing
    To be down-trodden into darkness soon.
    But now I am above thee, for thou art
    The bungling workmanship of fear, the block
    That awes the swart Barbarian; but I                               215
    Am what myself have made,--a nature wise
    With finding in itself the types of all,--
    With watching from the dim verge of the time
    What things to be are visible in the gleams
    Thrown forward on them from the luminous past,--                   220
    Wise with the history of its own frail heart,
    With reverence and with sorrow, and with love,
    Broad as the world, for freedom and for man.

      Thou and all strength shall crumble, except Love,
    By whom, and for whose glory, ye shall cease:                      225
    And, when thou art but a dim moaning heard
    From out the pitiless gloom of Chaos, I
    Shall be a power and a memory,
    A name to fright all tyrants with, a light
    Unsetting as the pole-star, a great voice                          230
    Heard in the breathless pauses of the fight
    By truth and freedom ever waged with wrong,
    Clear as a silver trumpet, to awake
    Huge echoes that from age to age live on
    In kindred spirits, giving them a sense                            235
    Of boundless power from boundless suffering wrung:
    And many a glazing eye shall smile to see
    The memory of my triumph (for to meet
    Wrong with endurance, and to overcome
    The present with a heart that looks beyond,                        240
    Are triumph), like a prophet eagle, perch
    Upon the sacred banner of the Right.
    Evil springs up, and flowers, and bears no seed,
    And feeds the green earth with its swift decay,
    Leaving it richer for the growth of truth;                         245
    But Good, once put in action or in thought,
    Like a strong oak, doth from its boughs shed down
    The ripe germs of a forest. Thou, weak god,
    Shalt fade and be forgotten! but this soul,
    Fresh-living still in the serene abyss,                            250
    In every heaving shall partake, that grows
    From heart to heart among the sons of men,--
    As the ominous hum before the earthquake runs
    Far through the AEgean from roused isle to isle,--
    Foreboding wreck to palaces and shrines,                           255
    And mighty rents in many a cavernous error
    That darkens the free light to man:--This heart,
    Unscarred by thy grim vulture, as the truth
    Grows but more lovely 'neath the beaks and claws
    Of Harpies blind that fain would soil it, shall                    260
    In all the throbbing exultations share
    That wait on freedom's triumphs, and in all
    The glorious agonies of martyr-spirits,--
    Sharp lightning-throes to split the jagged clouds
    That veil the future, showing them the end,--                      265
    Pain's thorny crown for constancy and truth,
    Girding the temples like a wreath of stars.
    This is a thought, that, like the fabled laurel,
    Makes my faith thunder-proof; and thy dread bolts
    Fall on me like the silent flakes of snow                          270
    On the hoar brows of aged Caucasus:
    But, O thought far more blissful, they can rend
    This cloud of flesh, and make my soul a star!

      Unleash thy crouching thunders now, O Jove!
    Free this high heart, which, a poor captive long,                  275
    Doth knock to be let forth, this heart which still,
    In its invincible manhood, overtops
    Thy puny godship, as this mountain doth
    The pines that moss its roots. Oh, even now,
    While from my peak of suffering I look down,                       280
    Beholding with a far-spread gush of hope
    The sunrise of that Beauty, in whose face,
    Shone all around with love, no man shall look
    But straightway like a god he is uplift
    Unto the throne long empty for his sake,                           285
    And clearly oft foreshadowed in wide dreams
    By his free inward nature, which nor thou,
    Nor any anarch after thee, can bind
    From working its great doom,--now, now set free
    This essence, not to die, but to become                            290
    Part of that awful Presence which doth haunt
    The palaces of tyrants, to hunt off,
    With its grim eyes and fearful whisperings
    And hideous sense of utter loneliness,
    All hope of safety, all desire of peace,                           295
    All but the loathed forefeeling of blank death,--
    Part of that spirit which doth ever brood
    In patient calm on the unpilfered nest
    Of man's deep heart, till mighty thoughts grow fledged
    To sail with darkening shadow o'er the world,                      300
    Filling with dread such souls as dare not trust
    In the unfailing energy of Good,
    Until they swoop, and their pale quarry make
    Of some o'erbloated wrong,--that spirit which
    Scatters great hopes in the seed-field of man,                     305
    Like acorns among grain, to grow and be
    A roof for freedom in all coming time!
    But no, this cannot be; for ages yet,
    In solitude unbroken, shall I hear
    The angry Caspian to the Euxine shout,                             310
    And Euxine answer with a muffled roar,
    On either side storming the giant walls
    Of Caucasus with leagues of climbing foam
    (Less, from my height, than flakes of downy snow),
    That draw back baffled but to hurl again,                          315
    Snatched up in wrath and horrible turmoil,
    Mountain on mountain, as the Titans erst,
    My brethren, scaling the high seat of Jove,
    Heaved Pelion upon Ossa's shoulders broad
    In vain emprise. The moon will come and go                         320
    With her monotonous vicissitude;
    Once beautiful, when I was free to walk
    Among my fellows, and to interchange
    The influence benign of loving eyes,
    But now by aged use grown wearisome;--                             325
    False thought! most false! for how could I endure
    These crawling centuries of lonely woe
    Unshamed by weak complaining, but for thee,
    Loneliest, save me, of all created things,
    Mild-eyed Astarte, my best comforter,[21]                          330
    With thy pale smile of sad benignity?

[Footnote 21: Daughter of Heaven and Earth, and symbol of Nature.]

      Year after year will pass away and seem
    To me, in mine eternal agony,
    But as the shadows of dumb summer clouds,
    Which I have watched so often darkening o'er                       335
    The vast Sarmatian plain, league-wide at first,
    But, with still swiftness, lessening on and on
    Till cloud and shadow meet and mingle where
    The gray horizon fades into the sky,
    Far, far to northward. Yes, for ages yet                           340
    Must I lie here upon my altar huge,
    A sacrifice for man. Sorrow will be,
    As it hath been, his portion; endless doom,
    While the immortal with the mortal linked
    Dreams of its wings and pines for what it dreams,                  345
    With upward yearn unceasing. Better so:
    For wisdom is meek sorrow's patient child,
    And empire over self, and all the deep
    Strong charities that make men seem like gods;
    And love, that makes them be gods, from her breasts                350
    Sucks in the milk that makes mankind one blood.
    Good never comes unmixed, or so it seems,
    Having two faces, as some images
    Are carved, of foolish gods; one face is ill;
    But one heart lies beneath, and that is good,                      355
    As are all hearts, when we explore their depths.
    Therefore, great heart, bear up! thou art but type
    Of what all lofty spirits endure, that fain
    Would win men back to strength and peace through love:
    Each hath his lonely peak, and on each heart                       360
    Envy, or scorn, or hatred, tears lifelong
    With vulture beak; yet the high soul is left;
    And faith, which is but hope grown wise; and love
    And patience, which at last shall overcome.
