    Over his keys the musing organist,
      Beginning doubtfully and far away,
    First lets his fingers wander as they list,
      And builds a Bridge from Dreamland for his lay:
    Then, as the touch of his loved instrument
      Gives hope and fervor, nearer draws his theme,
    First guessed by faint auroral flushes sent
      Along the wavering vista of his dream.

    Not only around our infancy
    Doth heaven with all its splendors lie;
    Daily, with souls that cringe and plot,
    We Sinais climb and know it not.

    Over our manhood bend the skies;
      Against our fallen and traitor lives
    The great winds utter prophecies:
      With our faint hearts the mountain strives;
    Its arms outstretched, the druid wood
      Waits with its benedicite;
    And to our age's drowsy blood
      Still shouts the inspiring sea.

    Earth gets its price for what Earth gives us;
      The beggar is taxed for a corner to die in,
    The priest hath his fee who comes and shrives us,
      We bargain for the graves we lie in;


    At the Devil's booth are all things sold,
    Each ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold;
      For a cap and bells our lives we pay,
    Bubbles we buy with a whole soul's tasking:
      'T is heaven alone that is given away,
    'T is only God may be had for the asking;
    No price is set on the lavish summer;
    June may be had by the poorest comer.

    And what is so rare as a day in June?
      Then, if ever, come perfect days;
    Then Heaven tries the earth if it be in tune,
      And over it softly her warm ear lays:
    Whether we look, or whether we listen,
    We hear life murmur, or see it glisten;
    Every clod feels a stir of might,
      An instinct within it that reaches and towers,
    And, groping blindly above it for light,
      Climbs to a soul in grass and flowers;
    The flush of life may well be seen
      Thrilling back over hills and valleys;
    The cowslip startles in meadows green,
      The buttercup catches the sun in its chalice,
    And there's never a leaf nor a blade too mean
      To be some happy creature's palace;
    The little bird sits at his door in the sun,
      Atilt like a blossom among the leaves,
    And lets his illumined being o'errun
      With the deluge of summer it receives;
    His mate feels the eggs beneath her wings,
    And the heart in her dumb breast flutters and sings;
    He sings to the wide world, and she to her nest,--
    In the nice ear of Nature which song is the best?


    Now is the high-tide of the year,
      And whatever of life hath ebbed away
    Comes flooding back with a ripply cheer,
      Into every bare inlet and creek and bay;
    Now the heart is so full that a drop overfills it,
    We are happy now because God wills it;
    No matter how barren the past may have been,
    'Tis enough for us now that the leaves are green;
    We sit in the warm shade and feel right well
    How the sap creeps up and the blossoms swell;
    We may shut our eyes, but we cannot help knowing
    That skies are clear and grass is growing;
    The breeze comes whispering in our ear,
    That dandelions are blossoming near,
      That maize has sprouted, that streams are flowing,
    That the river is bluer than the sky,
    That the robin is plastering his house hard by;
    And if the breeze kept the good news back,
    For other couriers we should not lack;
      We could guess it all by yon heifer's lowing,--
    And hark! how clear bold chanticleer,
    Warmed with the new wine of the year,
      Tells all in his lusty crowing!

    Joy comes, grief goes, we know not how;
    Everything is happy now,
      Everything is upward striving;
    'T is as easy now for the heart to be true
    As for grass to be green or skies to be blue,--
      'T is the natural way of living:
    Who knows whither the clouds have fled?
       In the unscarred heaven they leave no wake,
    And the eyes forget the tears they have shed,
      The heart forgets its sorrow and ache;
    The soul partakes of the season's youth,
      And the sulphurous rifts of passion and woe
    Lie deep 'neath a silence pure and smooth,
      Like burnt-out craters healed with snow.
    What wonder if Sir Launfal now
    Remembered the keeping of his vow?




PART FIRST.

I.


    "My golden spurs now bring to me,
      And bring to me my richest mail,
    For to-morrow I go over land and sea,
      In search of the Holy Grail;
    Shall never a bed for me be spread,
    Nor shall a pillow be under my head,
    Till I begin my vow to keep;
    Here on the rushes will I sleep,
    And perchance there may come a vision true
    Ere day create the world anew."
      Slowly Sir Launfal's eyes grew dim,
      Slumber fell like a cloud on him,
    And into his soul the vision flew.




II.


    The crows flapped over by twos and threes,
    In the pool drowsed the cattle up to their knees,
      The little birds sang as if it were
      The one day of summer in all the year,
    And the very leaves seemed to sing on the trees:
    The castle alone in the landscape lay
    Like an outpost of winter, dull and gray:
    'Twas the proudest hall in the North Countree,
    And never its gates might opened be,
    Save to lord or lady of high degree;
    Summer besieged it on every side,
    But the churlish stone her assaults defied;
    She could not scale the chilly wall,
    Though around it for leagues her pavilions tall
    Stretched left and right,
    Over the hills and out of sight;
      Green and broad was every tent,
      And out of each a murmur went
    Till the breeze fell off at night.




III.


    The drawbridge dropped with a surly clang,
    And through the dark arch a charger sprang,
    Bearing Sir Launfal, the maiden knight,
    In his gilded mail, that flamed so bright
    It seemed the dark castle had gathered all
    Those shafts the fierce sun had shot over its wall
      In his siege of three hundred summers long,
    And, binding them all in one blazing sheaf,
      Had cast them forth: so, young and strong,
    And lightsome as a locust-leaf,
    Sir Launfal flashed forth in his unscarred mail,
    To seek in all climes for the Holy Grail.




IV.


    It was morning on hill and stream and tree,
      And morning in the young knight's heart;
    Only the castle moodily
    Rebuffed the gifts of the sunshine free,
      And gloomed by itself apart;
    The season brimmed all other things up
    Full as the rain fills the pitcher-plant's cup.




V.


    As Sir Launfal made morn through the darksome gate,
      He was 'ware of a leper, crouched by the same,
    Who begged with his hand and moaned as he sate;
      And a loathing over Sir Launfal came;
    The sunshine went out of his soul with a thrill,
      The flesh 'neath his armor 'gan shrink and crawl,
    And midway its leap his heart stood still
      Like a frozen waterfall;
    For this man, so foul and bent of stature,
    Rasped harshly against his dainty nature,
    And seemed the one blot on the summer morn,--
    So he tossed him a piece of gold in scorn.




VI.


    The leper raised not the gold from the dust:
      "Better to me the poor man's crust,
    Better the blessing of the poor,
    Though I turn me empty from his door;
    That is no true alms which the hand can hold;
    He gives nothing but worthless gold
      Who gives from a sense of duty;
    But he who gives but a slender mite,
    And gives to that which is out of sight,
      That thread of the all-sustaining Beauty
    Which runs through all and doth all unite,--
    The hand cannot clasp the whole of his alms,
    The heart outstretches its eager palms,
    For a god goes with it and makes it store
    To the soul that was starving in darkness before."




PRELUDE TO PART SECOND.


    Down swept the chill wind from the mountain peak,
      From the snow five thousand summers old;
    On open wold and hill-top bleak
      It had gathered all the cold,
    And whirled it like sleet on the wanderer's cheek;
    It carried a shiver everywhere
    From the unleafed boughs and pastures bare;
    The little brook heard it and built a roof
    'Neath which he could house him, winter-proof;
    All night by the white stars frosty gleams
    He groined his arches and matched his beams;
    Slender and clear were his crystal spars
    As the lashes of light that trim the stars;
    He sculptured every summer delight
    In his halls and chambers out of sight;
    Sometimes his tinkling waters slipt
    Down through a frost-leaved forest-crypt,
    Long, sparkling aisles of steel-stemmed trees
    Bending to counterfeit a breeze;
    Sometimes the roof no fretwork knew
    But silvery mosses that downward grew;
    Sometimes it was carved in sharp relief
    With quaint arabesques of ice-fern leaf;



    Sometimes it was simply smooth and clear
    For the gladness of heaven to shine through, and here
    He had caught the nodding bulrush-tops
    And hung them thickly with diamond-drops,
    That crystalled the beams of moon and sun,
    And made a star of every one:
    No mortal builder's most rare device
    Could match this winter-palace of ice;
    'Twas as if every image that mirrored lay
    In his depths serene through the summer day,
    Each fleeting shadow of earth and sky,
      Lest the happy model should be lost,
    Had been mimicked in fairy masonry
      By the elfin builders of the frost.

    Within the hall are song and laughter,
      The cheeks of Christmas grow red and jolly,
    And sprouting is every corbel and rafter
      With lightsome green of ivy and holly;
    Through the deep gulf of the chimney wide
    Wallows the Yule-log's roaring tide
    The broad flame-pennons droop and flap
      And belly and tug as a flag in the wind;
    Like a locust shrills the imprisoned sap,
      Hunted to death in its galleries blind;
    And swift little troops of silent sparks,
      Now pausing, now scattering away as in fear,
    Go threading the soot-forest's tangled darks
      Like herds of startled deer.
    But the wind without was eager and sharp,
    Of Sir Launfal's gray hair it makes a harp,
        And rattles and wrings
        The icy strings,
      Singing, in dreary monotone,
      A Christmas carol of its own,
      Whose burden still, as he might guess,
      Was--"Shelterless, shelterless, shelterless!"
    The voice of the seneschal flared like a torch
    As he shouted the wanderer away from the porch,
    And he sat in the gateway and saw all night
      The great hall-fire, so cheery and bold,
      Through the window-slits of the castle old,
    Build out its piers of ruddy light
      Against the drift of the cold.






PART SECOND.

I.


    There was never a leaf on bush or tree,
    The bare boughs rattled shudderingly;
    The river was dumb and could not speak,
      For the weaver Winter its shroud had spun,
    A single crow on the tree-top bleak
      From his shining feathers shed off the cold sun;
    Again it was morning, but shrunk and cold,
    As if her veins were sapless and old,
    And she rose up decrepitly
    For a last dim look at earth and sea.




II.


    Sir Launfal turned from his own hard gate,
    For another heir in his earldom sate;
    An old, bent man, worn out and frail,
    He came back from seeking the Holy Grail;
    Little he recked of his earldom's loss,
    No more on his surcoat was blazoned the cross,
    But deep in his soul the sign he wore,
    The badge of the suffering and the poor.




III.


    Sir Launfal's raiment thin and spare
    Was idle mail 'gainst the barbed air,
    For it was just at the Christmas time;
    So he mused, as he sat, of a sunnier clime,
    And sought for a shelter from cold and snow
    In the light and warmth of long-ago;
    He sees the snake-like caravan crawl
    O'er the edge of the desert, black and small,
    Then nearer and nearer, till, one by one,
    He can count the camels in the sun,
    As over the red-hot sands they pass
    To where, in its slender necklace of grass,
    The little spring laughed and leapt in the shade,
    And with its own self like an infant played,
    And waved its signal of palms.




IV.


    "For Christ's sweet sake, I beg an alms;"--
    The happy camels may reach the spring,
    But Sir Launfal sees only the grewsome thing,
    The leper, lank as the rain-blanched bone,
    That cowers beside him, a thing as lone
    And white as the ice-isles of Northern seas
    In the desolate horror of his disease.




V.


    And Sir Launfal said,--"I behold in thee
    An image of Him who died on the tree;
    Thou also hast had thy crown of thorns,--
    Thou also hast had the world's buffets and scorns,--
    And to thy life were not denied
    The wounds in the hands and feet and side;
    Mild Mary's Son, acknowledge me;
    Behold, through him, I give to Thee!"




VI.


    Then the soul of the leper stood up in his eyes
      And looked at Sir Launfal, and straightway he
    Remembered in what a haughtier guise
      He had flung an alms to leprosie,
    When he girt his young life up in gilded mail
    And set forth in search of the Holy Grail.
    The heart within him was ashes and dust;
    He parted in twain his single crust,
    He broke the ice on the streamlet's brink,
    And gave the leper to eat and drink:
    'T was a mouldy crust of coarse brown bread,
      'T was water out of a wooden bowl,--
    Yet with fine wheaten bread was the leper fed,
      And 't was red wine he drank with his thirsty soul.





VII.


    As Sir Launfal mused with a downcast face,
    A light shone round about the place;
    The leper no longer crouched at his side,
    But stood before him glorified,
    Shining and tall and fair and straight
    As the pillar that stood by the Beautiful Gate,--
    Himself the Gate whereby men can
    Enter the temple of God in Man.




VIII.


    His words were shed softer than leaves from the pine,
    And they fell on Sir Launfal as snows on the brine,
    That mingle their softness and quiet in one
    With the shaggy unrest they float down upon;
    And the voice that was calmer than silence said,
    "Lo it is I, be not afraid!
    In many climes, without avail,
    Thou hast spent thy life for the Holy Grail;
    Behold, it is here,--this cup which thou
    Didst fill at the streamlet for Me but now;
    This crust is My body broken for thee,
    This water His blood that died on the tree;
    The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,
    In whatso we share with another's need:
    Not what we give, but what we share,--
    For the gift without the giver is bare;
    Who gives himself with his alms feeds three,--
    Himself, his hungering neighbor, and Me."




IX.


    Sir Launfal awoke as from a swound:--
    "The Grail in my castle here is found!
    Hang my idle armor up on the wall,
    Let it be the spider's banquet-hall;
    He must be fenced with stronger mail
    Who would seek and find the Holy Grail."




X.


    The castle gate stands open now,
      And the wanderer is welcome to the hall
    As the hangbird is to the elm-tree bough;
      No longer scowl the turrets tall,
    The Summer's long siege at last is o'er;
    When the first poor outcast went in at the door,
    She entered with him in disguise,
    And mastered the fortress by surprise;
    There is no spot she loves so well on ground,
    She lingers and smiles there the whole year round;
    The meanest serf on Sir Launfal's land
    Has hall and bower at his command;
    And there's no poor man in the North Countree
    But is lord of the earldom as much as he.




ODE RECITED AT THE HARVARD COMMEMORATION.


I.


         Weak-winged is song,
    Nor aims at that clear-ethered height
    Whither the brave deed climbs for light:
         We seem to do them wrong,
    Bringing our robin's-leaf to deck their hearse
    Who in warm life-blood wrote their nobler verse,
    Our trivial song to honor those who come
    With ears attuned to strenuous trump and drum,
    And shaped in squadron-strophes their desire,
    Live battle-odes whose lines were steel and fire:
         Yet sometimes feathered words are strong,
    A gracious memory to buoy up and save
    From Lethe's dreamless ooze, the common grave
         Of the unventurous throng.




II.


    To-day our Reverend Mother welcomes back
      Her wisest Scholars, those who understood
    The deeper teaching of her mystic tome,
      And offered their fresh lives to make it good:
          No lore of Greece or Rome,
    No science peddling with the names of things,
    Or reading stars to find inglorious fates,
          Can lift our life with wings
    Far from Death's idle gulf that for the many waits,
          And lengthen out our dates
    With that clear fame whose memory sings
    In manly hearts to come, and nerves them and dilates:
    Nor such thy teaching, Mother of us all!
          Not such the trumpet-call
          Of thy diviner mood,
          That could thy sons entice
    From happy homes and toils, the fruitful nest
    Of those half-virtues which the world calls best,
          Into War's tumult rude;
          But rather far that stern device
    The sponsors chose that round thy cradle stood
          In the dim, unventured wood,
          The VERITAS that lurks beneath
          The letter's unprolific sheath,
      Life of whate'er makes life worth living,
    Seed-grain of high emprise, immortal food,
      One heavenly thing whereof earth hath the giving.




III.


    Many loved Truth, and lavished life's best oil
      Amid the dust of books to find her,
    Content at last, for guerdon of their toil,
      With the cast mantle she hath left behind her.
        Many in sad faith sought for her,
        Many with crossed hands sighed for her;
        But these, our brothers, fought for her,
        At life's dear peril wrought for her,
        So loved her that they died for her,
        Tasting the raptured fleetness
        Of her divine completeness
          Their higher instinct knew
    Those love her best who to themselves are true,
    And what they dare to dream of, dare to do;
        They followed her and found her
        Where all may hope to find,
    Not in the ashes of the burnt-out mind,
    But beautiful, with danger's sweetness round her.
      Where faith made whole with deed
      Breathes its awakening breath
      Into the lifeless creed,
      They saw her plumed and mailed,
      With sweet, stern face unveiled,
    And all-repaying eyes, look proud on them in death.





IV.


    Our slender life runs rippling by, and glides
      Into the silent hollow of the past;
           What is there that abides
      To make the next age better for the last?
           Is earth too poor to give us
      Something to live for here that shall outlive us?
           Some more substantial boon
    Than such as flows and ebbs with Fortune's fickle moon?
           The little that we see
           From doubt is never free;
           The little that we do
           Is but half-nobly true;
           With our laborious hiving
    What men call treasure, and the gods call dross,
      Life seems a jest of Fate's contriving,
      Only secure in every one's conniving,
    A long account of nothings paid with loss,
    Where we poor puppets, jerked by unseen wires,
      After our little hour of strut and rave,
    With all our pasteboard passions and desires,
    Loves, hates, ambitions, and immortal fires,
      Are tossed pell-mell together in the grave.
      But stay! no age was e'er degenerate,
      Unless men held it at too cheap a rate,
      For in our likeness still we shape our fate.
          Ah, there is something here
      Unfathomed by the cynic's sneer,
      Something that gives our feeble light
      A high immunity from Night,
      Something that leaps life's narrow bars
    To claim its birthright with the hosts of heaven;
      A seed of sunshine that doth leaven
      Our earthly dulness with the beams of stars,
           And glorify our clay
    With light from fountains elder than the Day;
      A conscience more divine than we,
      A gladness fed with secret tears,
      A vexing, forward-reaching sense
      Of some more noble permanence;
           A light across the sea,
      Which haunts the soul and will not let it be,
    Still glimmering from the heights of undegenerate years.




V.


          Whither leads the path
        To ampler fates that leads?
        Not down through flowery meads,
          To reap an aftermath
        Of youth's vainglorious weeds;
        But up the steep, amid the wrath
      And shock of deadly-hostile creeds,
      Where the world's best hope and stay
    By battle's flashes gropes a desperate way,
    And every turf the fierce foot clings to bleeds.
        Peace hath her not ignoble wreath,
        Ere yet the sharp, decisive word
    Light the black lips of cannon, and the sword
        Dreams in its easeful sheath;
    But some day the live coal behind the thought,
        Whether from Baal's stone obscene,
        Or from the shrine serene
        Of God's pure altar brought,
    Bursts up in flame; the war of tongue and pen
    Learns with what deadly purpose it was fraught,
    And, helpless in the fiery passion caught,
    Shakes all the pillared state with shock of men:
    Some day the soft Ideal that we wooed
    Confronts us fiercely, foe-beset, pursued,
    And cries reproachful: "Was it, then, my praise,
    And not myself was loved? Prove now thy truth;
    I claim of thee the promise of thy youth;
    Give me thy life, or cower in empty phrase,
    The victim of thy genius, not its mate!"
      Life may be given in many ways,
      And loyalty to Truth be sealed
    As bravely in the closet as the field,
        So bountiful is Fate;
        But then to stand beside her,
        When craven churls deride her,
    To front a lie in arms and not to yield,
        This shows, methinks, God's plan
        And measure of a stalwart man,
        Limbed like the old heroic breeds,
      Who stands self-poised on manhood's solid earth;
      Not forced to frame excuses for his birth,
    Fed from within with all the strength he needs.




VI.


    Such was he, our Martyr-Chief,
        Whom late the Nation he had led,
        With ashes on her head,
    Wept with the passion of an angry grief:
    Forgive me, if from present things I turn
    To speak what in my heart will beat and burn,
    And hang my wreath on his world-honored urn.
          Nature, they say, doth dote,
          And cannot make a man
          Save on some worn-out plan,
          Repeating us by rote:
    For him her Old-World moulds aside she threw,
        And, choosing sweet clay from the breast
          Of the unexhausted West,
    With stuff untainted shaped a hero new,
    Wise, steadfast in the strength of God, and true.
            How beautiful to see
    Once more a shepherd of mankind indeed,
    Who loved his charge, but never loved to lead;
    One whose meek flock the people joyed to be,
        Not lured by any cheat of birth,
        But by his clear-grained human worth,
    And brave old wisdom of sincerity!
        They knew that outward grace is dust;
        They could not choose but trust
    In that sure-footed mind's unfaltering skill,
            And supple-tempered will
    That bent like perfect steel to spring again and thrust.
        His was no lonely mountain-peak of mind,
        Thrusting to thin air o'er our cloudy bars,
        A sea-mark now, now lost in vapors blind;
        Broad prairie rather, genial, level-lined,
        Fruitful and friendly for all human-kind,
    Yet also nigh to heaven and loved of loftiest stars.
            Nothing of Europe here,
    Or, then, of Europe fronting mornward still,
            Ere any names of Serf and Peer
        Could Nature's equal scheme deface
            And thwart her genial will;
        Here was a type of the true elder race,
    And one of Plutarch's men talked with us face to face.
      I praise him not; it were too late;
    And some innative weakness there must be
    In him who condescends to victory
    Such as the Present gives, and cannot wait,
      Safe in himself as in a fate.
            So always firmly he:
            He knew to bide his time,
            And can his fame abide,
    Still patient in his simple faith sublime,
            Till the wise years decide.
      Great captains, with their guns and drums,
        Disturb our judgment for the hour,
            But at last silence comes;
      These all are gone, and, standing like a tower,
      Our children shall behold his fame,
        The kindly-earnest, brave, foreseeing man,
    Sagacious, patient, dreading praise, not blame,
      New birth of our new soil, the first American.




VII.


      Long as man's hope insatiate can discern
        Or only guess some more inspiring goal
        Outside of Self, enduring as the pole,
      Along whose course the flying axles burn
      Of spirits bravely-pitched, earth's manlier brood;
        Long as below we cannot find
      The meed that stills the inexorable mind;
      So long this faith to some ideal Good,
      Under whatever mortal name it masks,
      Freedom, Law, Country, this ethereal mood
    That thanks the Fates for their severer tasks,
      Feeling its challenged pulses leap,
      While others skulk in subterfuges cheap,
    And, set in Danger's van, has all the boon it asks,
      Shall win man's praise and woman's love,
      Shall be a wisdom that we set above
    All other skills and gifts to culture dear,
      A virtue round whose forehead we enwreathe
      Laurels that with a living passion breathe
    When other crowns grow, while we twine them, sear.
      What brings us thronging these high rites to pay,
    And seal these hours the noblest of our year,
      Save that our brothers found this better way?




VIII.


      We sit here in the Promised Land
    That flows with Freedom's honey and milk;
      But 't was they won it, sword in hand,
    Making the nettle danger soft for us as silk.
      We welcome back our bravest and our best;--
      Ah me! not all! some come not with the rest,
    Who went forth brave and bright as any here!
    I strive to mix some gladness with my strain,
            But the sad strings complain,
            And will not please the ear:
    I sweep them for a pæan, but they wane
              Again and yet again
    Into a dirge, and die away in pain.
    In these brave ranks I only see the gaps,
    Thinking of dear ones whom the dumb turf wraps,
    Dark to the triumph which they died to gain:
        Fitlier may others greet the living,
        For me the past is unforgiving;
          I with uncovered head
          Salute the sacred dead,
    Who went, and who return not.--Say not so!
    'Tis not the grapes of Canaan that repay,
    But the high faith that failed not by the way;
    Virtue treads paths that end not in the grave;
    No bar of endless night exiles the brave;
            And to the saner mind
    We rather seem the dead that stayed behind.
    Blow, trumpets, all your exultations blow!
    For never shall their aureoled presence lack:
    I see them muster in a gleaming row,
    With ever-youthful brows that nobler show;
    We find in our dull road their shining track;
            In every nobler mood
    We feel the orient of their spirit glow,
    Part of our life's unalterable good,
    Of all our saintlier aspiration;
            They come transfigured back,
    Secure from change in their high-hearted ways,
    Beautiful evermore, and with the rays
    Of morn on their white Shields of Expectation!







IX.


            But is there hope to save
      Even this ethereal essence from the grave?
      What ever 'scaped Oblivion's subtle wrong
    Save a few clarion names, or golden threads of song
            Before my musing eye
        The mighty ones of old sweep by,
      Disvoicéd now and insubstantial things,
      As noisy once as we; poor ghosts of kings,
      Shadows of empire wholly gone to dust,
      And many races, nameless long ago,
      To darkness driven by that imperious gust
      Of ever-rushing Time that here doth blow:
      O visionary world, condition strange,
      Where naught abiding is but only Change,
    Where the deep-bolted stars themselves still shift and range!
      Shall we to more continuance make pretence?
    Renown builds tombs; a life-estate is Wit;
            And, bit by bit,
    The cunning years steal all from us but woe:
      Leaves are we, whose decays no harvest sow.
          But, when we vanish hence,
      Shall they lie forceless in the dark below,
      Save to make green their little length of sods,
      Or deepen pansies for a year or two,
      Who now to us are shining-sweet as gods?
      Was dying all they had the skill to do?
      That were not fruitless: but the Soul resents
      Such short-lived service, as if blind events
      Ruled without her, or earth could so endure;
      She claims a more divine investiture
      Of longer tenure than Fame's airy rents;
      Whate'er she touches doth her nature share;
      Her inspiration haunts the ennobled air,
          Gives eyes to mountains blind,
      Ears to the deaf earth, voices to the wind,
      And her clear trump sings succor everywhere
      By lonely bivouacs to the wakeful mind,
      For soul inherits all that soul could dare:
          Yea, Manhood hath a wider span
      And larger privilege of life than man.
      The single deed, the private sacrifice,
      So radiant now through proudly-hidden tears,
      Is covered up ere long from mortal eyes
      With thoughtless drift of the deciduous years;
      But that high privilege that makes all men peers,
      That leap of heart whereby a people rise
            Up to a noble anger's height,
    And, flamed on by the Fates, not shrink, but grow more bright,
        That swift validity in noble veins,
        Of choosing danger and disdaining shame,
            Of being set on flame
        By the pure fire that flies all contact base,
    But wraps its chosen with angelic might,
            These are imperishable gains,
      Sure as the sun, medicinal as light,
      These hold great futures in their lusty reins
    And certify to earth a new imperial race.




X.


              Who now shall sneer?
          Who dare again to say we trace
          Our lines to a plebeian race?
              Roundhead and Cavalier!
    Dumb are those names erewhile in battle loud;
    Dream-footed as the shadow of a cloud,
          They flit across the ear:
    That is best blood that hath most iron in 't.
    To edge resolve with, pouring without stint
          For what makes manhood dear.
        Tell us not of Plantagenets,
    Hapsburgs, and Guelfs, whose thin bloods crawl
    Down from some victor in a border-brawl!
        How poor their outworn coronets,
    Matched with one leaf of that plain civic wreath
    Our brave for honor's blazon shall bequeath,
      Through whose desert a rescued Nation sets
    Her heel on treason, and the trumpet hears
    Shout victory, tingling Europe's sullen ears
      With vain resentments and more vain regrets!




XI.


        Not in anger, not in pride,
        Pure from passion's mixture rude,
        Ever to base earth allied,
        But with far-heard gratitude,
        Still with heart and voice renewed,
      To heroes living and dear martyrs dead,
    The strain should close that consecrates our brave.
      Lift the heart and lift the head!
        Lofty be its mood and grave,
        Not without a martial ring,
        Not without a prouder tread
        And a peal of exultation:
        Little right has he to sing
        Through whose heart in such an hour
        Beats no march of conscious power,
        Sweeps no tumult of elation!
        'Tis no Man we celebrate,
        By his country's victories great,
      A hero half, and half the whim of Fate,
        But the pith and marrow of a Nation
        Drawing force from all her men,
        Highest, humblest, weakest, all,
        For her time of need, and then
        Pulsing it again through them,
    Till the basest can no longer cower,
    Feeling his soul spring up divinely tall,
    Touched but in passing by her mantle-hem.
    Come back, then, noble pride, for 'tis her dower!
        How could poet ever tower,
        If his passions, hopes, and fears,
        If his triumphs and his tears,
        Kept not measure with his people?
    Boom, cannon, boom to all the winds and waves!
    Clash out, glad bells, from every rocking steeple!
    Banners, adance with triumph, bend your staves!
      And from every mountain-peak
      Let beacon-fire to answering beacon speak,
      Katahdin tell Monadnock, Whiteface he,
      And so leap on in light from sea to sea,
        Till the glad news be sent
        Across a kindling continent,
    Making earth feel more firm and air breathe braver:
    "Be proud! for she is saved, and all have helped to save her!
      She that lifts up the manhood of the poor,
      She of the open soul and open door,
      With room about her hearth for all mankind!
      The fire is dreadful in her eyes no more;
      From her bold front the helm she doth unbind,
      Sends all her handmaid armies back to spin,
      And bids her navies, that so lately hurled
      Their crashing battle, hold their thunders in,
    Swimming like birds of calm along the unharmful shore.
      No challenge sends she to the elder world,
      That looked askance and hated; a light scorn
      Plays o'er her mouth, as round her mighty knees
      She calls her children back, and waits the morn
    Of nobler day, enthroned between her subject seas."




XII.


    Bow down, dear Land, for thou hast found release!
      Thy God, in these distempered days,
      Hath taught thee the sure wisdom of His ways,
    And through thine enemies hath wrought thy peace!
        Bow down in prayer and praise!
    No poorest in thy borders but may now
    Lift to the juster skies a man's enfranchised brow,
    O Beautiful! my Country! ours once more!
    Smoothing thy gold of war-dishevelled hair
    O'er such sweet brows as never other wore,
        And letting thy set lips,
        Freed from wrath's pale eclipse,
    The rosy edges of their smile lay bare,
    What words divine of lover or of poet
    Could tell our love and make thee know it,
    Among the Nations bright beyond compare?
        What were our lives without thee?
        What all our lives to save thee?
        We reck not what we gave thee;
        We will not dare to doubt thee,
    But ask whatever else, and we will dare!




ON BOARD THE '76.

WRITTEN FOR MR. BRYANT'S SEVENTIETH BIRTHDAY.

NOVEMBER 3, 1864.



    Our ship lay tumbling in an angry sea,
      Her rudder gone, her mainmast o'er the side;
    Her scuppers, from the waves' clutch staggering free,
      Trailed threads of priceless crimson through the tide;
    Sails, shrouds, and spars with pirate cannon torn,
        We lay, awaiting morn.

    Awaiting morn, such morn as mocks despair;
      And she that bare the promise of the world
    Within her sides, now hopeless, helmless, bare,
      At random o'er the wildering waters hurled;
    The reek of battle drifting slow alee
        Not sullener than we.

    Morn came at last to peer into our woe,
      When lo, a sail! Now surely help was nigh;
    The red cross flames aloft, Christ's pledge; but no,
      Her black guns grinning hate, she rushes by
    And hails us:--"Gains the leak! Ay, so we thought!
        Sink, then, with curses fraught!"

    I leaned against my gun still angry-hot,
      And my lids tingled with the tears held back;
    This scorn methought was crueller than shot:
      The manly death-grip in the battle-wrack,
    Yard-arm to yard-arm, were more friendly far
        Than such fear-smothered war.

    There our foe wallowed, like a wounded brute
      The fiercer for his hurt. What now were best?
    Once more tug bravely at the peril's root,
      Though death came with it? Or evade the test
    If right or wrong in this God's world of ours
        Be leagued with higher powers?

    Some, faintly loyal, felt their pulses lag
      With the slow beat that doubts and then despairs;
    Some, caitiff, would have struck the starry flag
      That knits us with our past, and makes us heirs
    Of deeds high-hearted as were ever done
        'Neath the all-seeing sun.


    But there was one, the Singer of our crew,
      Upon whose head Age waved his peaceful sign,
    But whose red heart's-blood no surrender knew;
      And couchant under brows of massive line,
    The eyes, like guns beneath a parapet,
        Watched, charged with lightnings yet.

    The voices of the hills did his obey;
      The torrents flashed and tumbled in his song;
    He brought our native fields from far away,
      Or set us 'mid the innumerable throng
    Of dateless woods, or where we heard the calm
        Old homestead's evening psalm.

    But now he sang of faith to things unseen,
      Of freedom's birthright given to us in trust;
    And words of doughty cheer he spoke between,
      That made all earthly fortune seem as dust,
    Matched with that duty, old as Time and new,
        Of being brave and true.

    We, listening, learned what makes the might of words,--
      Manhood to back them, constant as a star;
    His voice rammed home our cannon, edged our swords,
      And sent our boarders shouting; shroud and spar
    Heard him and stiffened; the sails heard, and wooed
        The winds with loftier mood.

    In our dark hours he manned our guns again;
      Remanned ourselves from his own manhood's stores;
    Pride, honor, country, throbbed through all his strain:
      And shall we praise? God's praise was his before;
    And on our futile laurels he looks down,
        Himself our bravest crown.
