  The holy time is quiet as a Nun
  Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
  Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
  The gentleness of heaven is on the Sea:
  Listen! the mighty Being is awake
  And doth with his eternal motion make
  A sound like thunder--everlastingly.
  Dear Child! dear Girl! that walkest with me here,
  If thou appear'st untouch'd by solemn thought,
  Thy nature is not therefore less divine:
  Thou liest in Abraham's bosom all the year;
  And worshipp'st at the Temple's inner shrine,
  God being with thee when we know it not.




20. TO THE MEMORY OF _RAISLEY CALVERT_.

  Calvert! it must not be unheard by them
  Who may respect my name that I to thee
  Ow'd many years of early liberty.
  This care was thine when sickness did condemn
  Thy youth to hopeless wasting, root and stem:
  That I, if frugal and severe, might stray
  Where'er I liked; and finally array
  My temples with the Muse's diadem.
  Hence, if in freedom I have lov'd the truth,
  If there be aught of pure, or good, or great,
  In my past verse; or shall be, in the lays
  Of higher mood, which now I meditate,
  It gladdens me, O worthy, short-lived Youth!
  To think how much of this will be thy praise.




END OF THE FIRST PART.



PART THE SECOND.




SONNETS

DEDICATED _TO LIBERTY_.



1. COMPOSED BY THE  _SEA-SIDE, near CALAIS_,
   August, 1802.



  Fair Star of Evening, Splendor of the West,
  Star of my Country! on the horizon's brink
  Thou hangest, stooping, as might seem, to sink
  On England's bosom; yet well pleas'd to rest,
  Meanwhile, and be to her a glorious crest
  Conspicuous to the Nations. Thou, I think,
  Should'st be my Country's emblem; and should'st wink,
  Bright Star! with laughter on her banners, drest
  In thy fresh beauty. There! that dusky spot
  Beneath thee, it is England; there it lies.
  Blessings be on you both! one hope, one lot,
  One life, one glory! I, with many a fear
  For my dear Country, many heartfelt sighs,
  Among Men who do not love her linger here.




2. _CALAIS_, August, 1802.

  Is it a Reed that's shaken by the wind,
  Or what is it that ye go forth to see?
  Lords, Lawyers, Statesmen, Squires of low degree,
  Men known, and men unknown, Sick, Lame, and Blind,
  Post forward all, like Creatures of one kind,
  With first-fruit offerings crowd to bend the knee
  In France, before the new-born Majesty.
  'Tis ever thus. Ye Men of prostrate mind!
  A seemly reverence may be paid to power;
  But that's a loyal virtue, never sown
  In haste, nor springing with a transient shower:
  When truth, when sense, when liberty were flown
  What hardship had it been to wait an hour?
  Shame on you, feeble Heads, to slavery prone!




3. TO A FRIEND, COMPOSED NEAR CALAIS,
On the Road leading to Ardres, August 7th, 1802.

  Jones! when from Calais southward you and I
  Travell'd on foot together; then this Way,
  Which I am pacing now, was like the May
  With festivals of new-born Liberty:
  A homeless sound of joy was in the Sky;
  The antiquated Earth, as one might say,
  Beat like the heart of Man: songs, garlands, play,
  Banners, and happy faces, far and nigh!
  And now, sole register that these things were,
  Two solitary greetings have I heard,
  "_Good morrow, Citizen_!" a hollow word,
  As if a dead Man spake it! Yet despair
  I feel not: happy am I as a Bird:
  Fair seasons yet will come, and hopes as fair.




4.

  I griev'd for Buonaparte, with a vain
  And an unthinking grief! the vital blood
  Of that Man's mind what can it be? What food
  Fed his first hopes? What knowledge could He gain?
  'Tis not in battles that from youth we train
  The Governor who must be wise and good,
  And temper with the sternness of the brain
  Thoughts motherly, and meek as womanhood.
  Wisdom doth live with children round her knees:
  Books, leisure, perfect freedom, and the talk
  Man holds with week-day man in the hourly walk
  Of the mind's business: these are the degrees
  By which true Sway doth mount; this is the stalk
  True Power doth grow on; and her rights are these.




5. _CALAIS_.
August 15th, 1802.

  Festivals have I seen that were not names:
  This is young Buonaparte's natal day;
  And his is henceforth an established sway,
  Consul for life. With worship France proclaims
  Her approbation, and with pomps and games.
  Heaven grant that other Cities may be gay!
  Calais is not: and I have bent my way
  To the Sea-coast, noting that each man frames
  His business as he likes. Another time
  That was, when I was here long years ago:
  The senselessness of joy was then sublime!
  Happy is he, who, caring not for Pope,
  Consul, or King, can sound himself to know
  The destiny of Man, and live in hope.




6. ON THE EXTINCTION OF THE _VENETIAN REPUBLIC_.

  Once did She hold the gorgeous East in fee;
  And was the safeguard of the West: the worth
  Of Venice did not fall below her birth,
  Venice, the eldest Child of Liberty.
  She was a Maiden City, bright and free;
  No guile seduced, no force could violate;
  And when She took unto herself a Mate
  She must espouse the everlasting Sea.
  And what if she had seen those glories fade,
  Those titles vanish, and that strength decay,
  Yet shall some tribute of regret be paid
  When her long life hath reach'd its final day:
  Men are we, and must grieve when even the Shade
  Of that which once was great is pass'd away.




7. _THE KING OF SWEDEN_.

  The Voice of Song from distant lands shall call
  To that great King; shall hail the crowned Youth
  Who, taking counsel of unbending Truth,
  By one example hath set forth to all
  How they with dignity may stand; or fall,
  If fall they must. Now, whither doth it tend?
  And what to him and his shall be the end?
  That thought is one which neither can appal
  Nor chear him; for the illustrious Swede hath done
  The thing which ought to be: He stands _above_
  All consequences: work he hath begun
  Of fortitude, and piety, and love,
  Which all his glorious Ancestors approve:
  The Heroes bless him, him their rightful Son.




8. _TO TOUSSAINT L'OUVERTURE_.

  Toussaint, the most unhappy Man of Men!
  Whether the rural Milk-maid by her Cow
  Sing in thy hearing, or thou liest now
  Alone in some deep dungeon's earless den,
  O miserable chieftain! where and when
  Wilt thou find patience? Yet die not; do thou
  Wear rather in thy bonds a chearful brow:
  Though fallen Thyself, never to rise again,
  Live, and take comfort. Thou hast left behind
  Powers that will work for thee; air, earth, and skies;
  There's not a breathing of the common wind
  That will forget thee; thou hast great allies;
  Thy friends are exultations, agonies,
  And love, and Man's unconquerable mind.




9.

September 1st, 1802.


  We had a fellow-Passenger who came
  From Calais with us, gaudy in array,
  A Negro Woman like a Lady gay,
  Yet silent as a woman fearing blame;
  Dejected, meek, yea pitiably tame,
  She sate, from notice turning not away,
  But on our proffer'd kindness still did lay
  A weight of languid speech, or at the same
  Was silent, motionless in eyes and face.
  She was a Negro Woman driv'n from France,
  Rejected like all others of that race,
  Not one of whom may now find footing there;
  This the poor Out-cast did to us declare,
  Nor murmur'd at the unfeeling Ordinance.




10. COMPOSED IN THE _VALLEY, near DOVER_,
On the Day of landing.

  Dear fellow Traveller! here we are once more.
  The Cock that crows, the Smoke that curls, that sound
  Of Bells, those Boys that in yon meadow-ground
  In white sleev'd shirts are playing by the score,
  And even this little River's gentle roar,
  All, all are English. Oft have I look'd round
  With joy in Kent's green vales; but never found
  Myself so satisfied in heart before.
  Europe is yet in Bonds; but let that pass,
  Thought for another moment. Thou art free
  My Country! and 'tis joy enough and pride
  For one hour's perfect bliss, to tread the grass
  Of England once again, and hear and see,
  With such a dear Companion at my side.




11.

September, 1802.

  Inland, within a hollow Vale, I stood,
  And saw, while sea was calm and air was clear,
  The Coast of France, the Coast of France how near!
  Drawn almost into frightful neighbourhood.
  I shrunk, for verily the barrier flood
  Was like a Lake, or River bright and fair,
  A span of waters; yet what power is there!
  What mightiness for evil and for good!
  Even so doth God protect us if we be
  Virtuous and wise: Winds blow, and Waters roll,
  Strength to the brave, and Power, and Deity,
  Yet in themselves are nothing! One decree
  Spake laws to _them_, and said that by the Soul
  Only the Nations shall be great and free.




12. THOUGHT OF A BRITON ON THE _SUBJUGATION OF SWITZERLAND_.

  Two Voices are there; one is of the Sea,
  One of the Mountains; each a mighty Voice:
  In both from age to age Thou didst rejoice,
  They were thy chosen Music, Liberty!
  There came a Tyrant, and with holy glee
  Thou fought'st against Him; but hast vainly striven;
  Thou from thy Alpine Holds at length art driven,
  Where not a torrent murmurs heard by thee.
  Of one deep bliss thine ear hath been bereft:
  Then cleave, O cleave to that which still is left!
  For, high-soul'd Maid, what sorrow would it be
  That mountain Floods should thunder as before,
  And Ocean bellow from his rocky shore,
  And neither awful Voice be heard by thee!




13. WRITTEN IN LONDON,
September, 1802.

  O Friend! I know not which way I must look
  For comfort, being, as I am, opprest,
  To think that now our Life is only drest
  For shew; mean handywork of craftsman, cook,
  Or groom! We must run glittering like a Brook
  In the open sunshine, or we are unblest:
  The wealthiest man among us is the best:
  No grandeur now in nature or in book
  Delights us. Rapine, avarice, expence,
  This is idolatry; and these we adore:
  Plain living and high thinking are no more:
  The homely beauty of the good old cause
  Is gone; our peace, our fearful innocence,
  And pure religion breathing household laws.




14.

_LONDON_, 1802.

  Milton! thou should'st be living at this hour:
  England hath need of thee: she is a fen
  Of stagnant waters: altar, sword and pen,
  Fireside, the heroic wealth of hall and bower,
  Have forfeited their ancient English dower
  Of inward happiness. We are selfish men;
  Oh! raise us up, return to us again;
  And give us manners, virtue, freedom, power.
  Thy soul was like a Star and dwelt apart:
  Thou hadst a voice whose sound was like the sea;
  Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free,
  So didst thou travel on life's common way,
  In chearful godliness; and yet thy heart
  The lowliest duties on itself did lay.




15.

  Great Men have been among us; hands that penn'd
  And tongues that utter'd wisdom, better none:
  The later Sydney, Marvel, Harrington,
  Young Vane, and others who call'd Milton Friend.
  These Moralists could act and comprehend:
  They knew how genuine glory was put on;
  Taught us how rightfully a nation shone
  In splendor: what strength was, that would not bend
  But in magnanimous meekness. France, 'tis strange,
  Hath brought forth no such souls as we had then.
  Perpetual emptiness! unceasing change!
  No single Volume paramount, no code,
  No master spirit, no determined road;
  But equally a want of Books and Men!




16.

  It is not to be thought of that the Flood
  Of British freedom, which to the open Sea
  Of the world's praise from dark antiquity
  Hath flowed, "with pomp of waters, unwithstood,"
  Road by which all might come and go that would,
  And bear out freights of worth to foreign lands;
  That this most famous Stream in Bogs and Sands
  Should perish; and to evil and to good
  Be lost for ever. In our Halls is hung
  Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:
  We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
  That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
  Which Milton held. In every thing we are sprung
  Of Earth's first blood, have titles manifold.




17.

  When I have borne in memory what has tamed
  Great Nations, how ennobling thoughts depart
  When Men change Swords for Ledgers, and desert
  The Student's bower for gold, some fears unnamed
  I had, my Country! am I to be blamed?
  But, when I think of Thee, and what Thou art,
  Verily, in the bottom of my heart,
  Of those unfilial fears I am ashamed.
  But dearly must we prize thee; we who find
  In thee a bulwark of the cause of men;
  And I by my affection was beguiled.
  What wonder, if a Poet, now and then,
  Among the many movements of his mind,
  Felt for thee as a Lover or a Child.




18.

October, 1803.

  One might believe that natural miseries
  Had blasted France, and made of it a land
  Unfit for Men; and that in one great Band
  Her Sons were bursting forth, to dwell at ease.
  But 'tis a chosen soil, where sun and breeze
  Shed gentle favors; rural works are there;
  And ordinary business without care;
  Spot rich in all things that can soothe and please!
  How piteous then that there should be such dearth
  Of knowledge; that whole myriads should unite
  To work against themselves such fell despite:
  Should come in phrenzy and in drunken mirth,
  Impatient to put out the only light
  Of Liberty that yet remains on Earth!




19.

  There is a bondage which is worse to bear
  Than his who breathes, by roof, and floor, and wall,
  Pent in, a Tyrant's solitary Thrall:
  'Tis his who walks about in the open air,
  One of a Nation who, henceforth, must wear
  Their fetters in their Souls. For who could be,
  Who, even the best, in such condition, free
  From self-reproach, reproach which he must share
  With Human Nature? Never be it ours
  To see the Sun how brightly it will shine,
  And know that noble Feelings, manly Powers,
  Instead of gathering strength must droop and pine,
  And Earth with all her pleasant fruits and flowers
  Fade, and participate in Man's decline.




20.

October, 1803.

  These times touch money'd Worldlings with dismay:
  Even rich men, brave by nature, taint the air
  With words of apprehension and despair:
  While tens of thousands, thinking on the affray,
  Men unto whom sufficient for the day
  And minds not stinted or untill'd are given,
  Sound, healthy Children of the God of Heaven,
  Are cheerful as the rising Sun in May.
  What do we gather hence but firmer faith
  That every gift of noble origin
  Is breathed upon by Hope's perpetual breath;
  That virtue and the faculties within
  Are vital, and that riches are akin
  To fear, to change, to cowardice, and death!




21.

  England! the time is come when thou shouldst wean
  Thy heart from its emasculating food;
  The truth should now be better understood;
  Old things have been unsettled; we have seen
  Fair seed-time, better harvest might have been
  But for thy trespasses; and, at this day,
  If for Greece, Egypt, India, Africa,
  Aught good were destined, Thou wouldst step between.
  England! all nations in this charge agree:
  But worse, more ignorant in love and hate,
  Far, far more abject is thine Enemy:
  Therefore the wise pray for thee, though the freight
  Of thy offences be a heavy weight:
  Oh grief! that Earth's best hopes rest all with Thee!




22.

October, 1803.

  When, looking on the present face of things,
  I see one Man, of Men the meanest too!
  Rais'd up to sway the World, to do, undo,
  With mighty Nations for his Underlings,
  The great events with which old story rings
  Seem vain and hollow; I find nothing great;
  Nothing is left which I can venerate;
  So that almost a doubt within me springs
  Of Providence, such emptiness at length
  Seems at the heart of all things. But, great God!
  I measure back the steps which I have trod,
  And tremble, seeing, as I do, the strength
  Of such poor Instruments, with thoughts sublime
  I tremble at the sorrow of the time.




23. _TO THE MEN OF KENT_.

October, 1803.

  Vanguard of Liberty, ye Men of Kent,
  Ye Children of a Soil that doth advance
  It's haughty brow against the coast of France,
  Now is the time to prove your hardiment!
  To France be words of invitation sent!
  They from their Fields can see the countenance
  Of your fierce war, may ken the glittering lance.
  And hear you shouting forth your brave intent.
  Left single, in bold parley, Ye, of yore,
  Did from the Norman win a gallant wreath;
  Confirm'd the charters that were yours before;--
  No parleying now! In Britain is one breath;
  We all are with you now from Shore to Shore:--
  Ye Men of Kent, 'tis Victory or Death!




24.

October, 1803.

  Six thousand Veterans practis'd in War's game,
  Tried Men, at Killicranky were array'd
  Against an equal Host that wore the Plaid,
  Shepherds and Herdsmen.--Like a whirlwind came
  The Highlanders, the slaughter spread like flame;
  And Garry thundering down his mountain-road
  Was stopp'd, and could not breathe beneath the load
  Of the dead bodies. 'Twas a day of shame
  For them whom precept and the pedantry
  Of cold mechanic battle do enslave.
  Oh! for a single hour of that Dundee
  Who on that day the word of onset gave!
  Like conquest would the Men of England see;
  And her Foes find a like inglorious Grave.




25. _ANTICIPATION_.

October, 1803.

  Shout, for a mighty Victory is won!
  On British ground the Invaders are laid low;
  The breath of Heaven has drifted them like snow,
  And left them lying in the silent sun,
  Never to rise again!--the work is done.
  Come forth, ye Old Men, now in peaceful show
  And greet your Sons! drums beat, and trumpets blow!
  Make merry, Wives! ye little Children stun
  Your Grandame's ears with pleasure of your noise!
  Clap, Infants, clap your hands! Divine must be
  That triumph, when the very worst, the pain,
  And even the prospect of our Brethren slain,
  Hath something in it which the heart enjoys:--
  In glory will they sleep and endless sanctity.




26.

November, 1803.

  Another year!--another deadly blow!
  Another mighty Empire overthrown!
  And we are left, or shall be left, alone;
  The last that dares to struggle with the Foe.
  'Tis well! from this day forward we shall know
  That in ourselves our safety must be sought;
  That by our own right hands it must be wrought,
  That we must stand unpropp'd, or be laid low.
  O Dastard whom such foretaste doth not chear!
  We shall exult, if They who rule the land
  Be Men who hold its many blessings dear,
  Wise, upright, valiant; not a venal Band,
  Who are to judge of danger which they fear,
  And honour which they do not understand.





_NOTES to the FIRST VOLUME_


_NOTES_.


NOTE I.

PAGE I (9).--_To the Daisy_. This Poem, and two others to the same
Flower, which the Reader will find in the second Volume, were
written in the year 1802; which is mentioned, because in some of the
ideas, though not in the manner in which those ideas are connected,
and likewise even in some of the expressions, they bear a striking
resemblance to a Poem (lately published) of Mr. Montgomery, entitled,
a Field Flower. This being said, Mr. Montgomery will not think any
apology due to him; I cannot however help addressing him in the
words of the Father of English Poets.

      'Though it happe me to rehersin--
  That ye han in your freshe song is saied,
  Forberith me, and beth not ill apaied,
  Sith that ye se I doe it in the honour
  Of Love, and eke in service of the Flour.'


NOTE II.

PAGE 35 (43); line 13.--

      ".... persevering to the last,
      From well to better."

  'For Knightes ever should be persevering
  To seek honour without feintise or slouth
  Fro wele to better in all manner thing.'
                 CHAUCER:--_The Floure and the Leafe_.



NOTE III.

PAGE 37 (45).--_The Horn of Egremont Castle_. This Story is a
Cumberland tradition; I have heard it also related of the Hall of
Hutton John an ancient residence of the Huddlestones, in a
sequestered Valley upon the River Dacor.



NOTE IV.

PAGE 58 (64).--_The Seven Sisters_. The Story of this Poem is from
the German of FREDERICA BRUN.



NOTE V.

Page 63 (71); line 6.--

  ".... that thy Boat
  May rather seem
  To brood on air," _&c. &c._

See Carver's Description of his Situation upon one of the Lakes of
America.



NOTE VI.

PAGE 112 (120); line 8.--"Her tackling rich, and of apparel high."
From a passage in Skelton, which I cannot here insert, not having
the Book at hand.



NOTE VII.

PAGE 150 (158); line 11.--"Oh! for a single hour of that Dundee."
See an anecdote related in Mr. Scott's Border Minstrelsy.



NOTE VIII.

PAGE 152 (160); lines 13 and 14.--

  "Who are to judge of danger which they fear
  And honour which they do not understand."

These two lines from Lord Brooke's Life of Sir Philip Sydney.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
