    There was a time when meadow, grove, and stream,
    The earth, and every common sight,
            To me did seem
          Apparelled in celestial light,
    The glory and the freshness of a dream.                            5
    It is not now as it hath[312] been of yore;--
          Turn wheresoe’er I may,
            By night or day,
    The things which I have seen I now can see no more.

                          II

            The Rainbow comes and goes,                               10
            And lovely is the Rose,
            The Moon doth with delight
      Look round her when the heavens are bare,
            Waters on a starry night
            Are beautiful and fair;                                   15
        The sunshine is a glorious birth;
        But yet I know, where’er I go,
    That there hath passed away a glory from the earth.

                         III

    Now, while the birds thus sing a joyous song,
        And while the young lambs bound                               20
            As to the tabor’s sound,
    To me alone there came a thought of grief:
    A timely utterance gave that thought relief,
            And I again am strong:
    The cataracts blow their trumpets from the steep;                 25
    No more shall grief of mine the season wrong;
    I hear the Echoes through the mountains throng,
    The Winds come to me from the fields of sleep,
            And all the earth is gay;
                Land and sea                                          30
          Give themselves up to jollity,
            And with the heart of May
          Doth every Beast keep holiday;--
            Thou Child of Joy,
    Shout round me, let me hear thy shouts, thou happy Shepherd-boy!  35

                          IV

    Ye blessed Creatures, I have heard the call
        Ye to each other make; I see
    The heavens laugh with you in your jubilee;
        My heart is at your festival,
          My head hath its coronal,[313]                              40
    The fulness of your bliss, I feel--I feel it all.[314]
          Oh evil day! if I were sullen
          While Earth herself is adorning,[315]
              This sweet May-morning,
          And the Children are culling[316]                           45
              On every side,
          In a thousand valleys far and wide,
          Fresh flowers; while the sun shines warm,
    And the Babe leaps up on his Mother’s arm:--
          I hear, I hear, with joy I hear!                            50
          --But there’s a Tree, of many, one,
    A single Field which I have looked upon,
    Both of them speak of something that is gone:
          The Pansy at my feet
          Doth the same tale repeat:                                  55
    Whither is fled the visionary gleam?
    Where is it now,[317] the glory and the dream?

                          V

    Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting:
    The Soul that rises with us, our life’s Star,
          Hath had elsewhere its setting,                             60
            And cometh from afar:
          Not in entire forgetfulness,
          And not in utter nakedness,
    But trailing clouds of glory do we come
          From God, who is our home:                                  65
    Heaven lies about us in our infancy!
    Shades of the prison-house begin to close
          Upon the growing Boy,
    But He beholds the light, and whence it flows
          He sees it in his joy;                                      70
    The Youth, who daily farther from the east
          Must travel, still is Nature’s Priest,
          And by the vision splendid
          Is on his way attended;
    At length the Man perceives it[318] die away,                     75
    And fade into the light of common day.[319]

                          VI

    Earth fills her lap with pleasures[320] of her own;
    Yearnings she hath in her own natural kind,
    And, even with something of a Mother’s mind,
          And no unworthy aim,                                        80
          The homely Nurse doth all she can
    To make her Foster-child, her Inmate Man,
          Forget the glories he hath known,
    And that imperial palace whence he came.

                         VII

    Behold the Child among his new-born blisses,                      85
    A six years’ Darling[321] of a pigmy size!
    See, where ’mid work of his own hand he lies,
    Fretted by sallies of his mother’s kisses,
    With light upon him from his father’s eyes!
    See, at his feet, some little plan or chart,                      90
    Some fragment from his dream of human life,
    Shaped by himself with newly-learned art;
        A wedding or a festival,
        A mourning or a funeral;
          And this hath now his heart,                                95
        And unto this he frames his song:
          Then will he fit his tongue
    To dialogues of business, love, or strife;
        But it will not be long
        Ere this be thrown aside,                                    100
        And with new joy and pride
    The little Actor cons another part;
    Filling from time to time his “humorous stage”[322]
    With all the Persons, down to palsied Age,
    That Life brings with her in her equipage;                       105
        As if his whole vocation
        Were endless imitation.

                         VIII

    Thou, whose exterior semblance[323] doth belie
        Thy Soul’s immensity;
    Thou best Philosopher, who yet dost keep                         110
    Thy heritage, thou Eye among the blind,
    That, deaf and silent, read’st the eternal deep,
    Haunted for ever by the eternal mind,--
          Mighty Prophet! Seer blest!
          On whom those truths do rest,                              115
    Which we are toiling all our lives to find,
    In darkness lost, the darkness of the grave;[324]
    Thou, over whom thy Immortality
    Broods like the Day, a Master o’er a Slave,
    A Presence which is not to be put by;[325]                       120
    Thou little Child, yet glorious in the might
    Of heaven-born freedom on thy being’s height,[326]
    Why with such earnest pains dost thou provoke
    The years to bring the inevitable yoke,
    Thus blindly with thy blessedness at strife?                     125
    Full soon thy Soul shall have her earthly freight,
    And custom[327] lie upon thee with a weight,[328]
    Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life!

                          IX

            O joy! that in our embers
            Is something that doth live,                             130
            That nature yet remembers
            What was so fugitive!
    The thought of our past years in me doth breed
    Perpetual benediction;[329] not indeed
    For that which is most worthy to be blest;                       135
    Delight and liberty, the simple creed
    Of Childhood, whether busy or at rest,
    With new-fledged hope still fluttering in his breast:--[330]
            Not for these I raise
            The song of thanks and praise;                           140
          But for those obstinate questionings
          Of sense and outward things,
          Fallings from us, vanishings;
          Blank misgivings of a Creature
    Moving about in worlds not realised,                             145
    High instincts before which our mortal Nature
    Did tremble like a guilty Thing surprised:
            But for those first affections,
            Those shadowy recollections,
          Which, be they what they may,                              150
    Are yet the fountain light of all our day,
    Are yet a master light of all our seeing;
        Uphold us, cherish, and have power to make[331]
    Our noisy years seem moments in the being
    Of the eternal Silence: truths that wake,                        155
          To perish never;
    Which neither listlessness, nor mad endeavour,
            Nor Man nor Boy,
    Nor all that is at enmity with joy,
    Can utterly abolish or destroy!                                  160
          Hence in a season of calm weather,
            Though inland far we be,
    Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea
            Which brought us hither,
          Can in a moment travel thither,                            165
    And see the Children sport upon the shore,
    And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.

                          X

    Then sing, ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!
          And let the young Lambs bound
          As to the tabor’s sound!                                   170
    We in thought will join your throng,
          Ye that pipe and ye that play,
          Ye that through your hearts to-day
          Feel the gladness of the May!
    What though the radiance which was once so bright                175
    Be now for ever taken from my sight,
        Though nothing can bring back the hour
    Of splendour in the grass, of glory in the flower;
          We will grieve not, rather find
          Strength in what remains behind;                           180
          In the primal sympathy
          Which having been must ever be;
          In the soothing thoughts that spring
          Out of human suffering;
          In the faith that looks through death,                     185
    In years that bring the philosophic mind.

                          XI

    And O, ye Fountains, Meadows, Hills, and Groves,
    Forebode not any severing[332] of our loves!
    Yet in my heart of hearts I feel your might;
    I only have relinquished one delight                             190
    To live beneath your more habitual sway.
    I love the Brooks which down their channels fret,
    Even more than when I tripped lightly as they;
    The innocent brightness of a new-born Day
                  Is lovely yet;                                     195
    The Clouds that gather round the setting sun
    Do take a sober colouring from an eye
    That hath kept watch o’er man’s mortality;
    Another race hath been, and other palms are won.[333]
    Thanks to the human heart by which we live,                      200
    Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears,
    To me the meanest flower that blows[334] can give
    Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.[335]
